## State Management with React

In [Part 1 - The Architecture]({{% ref "/" %}}) we examined the design and structure of the [`dgraph-twitter-clone`](https://github.com/GabeStah/dgraph-twitter-clone) app. In [Part 2 - The API]({{% ref "/part-2-api" %}}) we looked at the API layer and how it allows our Twitter clone to either use an API or even completely bypass it in favor of direct transactions with the Dgraph data layer.

In this final part, we'll explore the React-based client of our `dgraph-twitter-clone` app. We'll see how a basic [React](https://reactjs.org/) app can be used in conjunction with new [React Hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) feature added to React in early 2019 to create a stateful and elegant single-page application powered by a Dgraph database for fast and efficient data management. Let's dive in!

### Installing the Client

You are encouraged to install the `dgraph-twitter-clone/client` application in a local dev environment so you can test it out and see the code in action as we walk through it. If you haven't done so, feel free to check out the [installation]({{% ref "/#installation" %}}) instructions from **Part 1**. Alternatively, if you already installed the `dgraph-twitter-clone` repo and have Dgraph up and running, you can start the client app by executing the `npm start` or `yarn start` command from the `dgraph-twitter-clone/client` directory.

### React Overview

Let's start with a brief overview of React and its functionality, to give some context for why the client app is structured as it is. At its core, React is a library to help with the creation of interactive user interfaces. This is often in the form of single-page web applications, but [React Native](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/) allows you to use much of the same code and techniques for creating mobile apps.

#### Components

Nearly all React apps are designed around the concept of [**components.**](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html) A component can best be thought of as a self-contained, reusable piece of the overall application. A component can contain any combination of HTML, CSS, and/or JavaScript. Components are always rendered to the DOM. React apps typically use a special HTML + JavaScript hybrid syntax called [JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html). JSX allows your components to embed JavaScript and other dynamic data inside traditional HTML markup.

For example, here's a `MySection` component defined in JSX that creates a `<section>` and assigns its `id` attribute to the value of the `sectionId` JavaScript constant. Code found inside curly braces (`{ }`) is considered JavaScript that should be evaluated.

```jsx
class MySection extends React.Component {
  const sectionId = 'special-section';

  render() {
    return (
      <section id={sectionId}>
        <p>Hello World</p>
      </section>
    );
  }
}
```

{{% notice "note" %}} Just as with the `dgraph-query-manager` package and the `dgraph-twitter-clone/api` app, the client app uses TypeScript wherever possible. In the realm of React, this takes the form of `.tsx` files, which similar to `.jsx` except it provides the ability to use TypeScript in place of plain JavaScript. {{% /notice %}}

A React component is traditionally defined as a class component that extends `React.Component`, as seen above. However, you can also create **function components,** which behave similarly to class components, except they are defined (and behave) exactly like plain JavaScript functions. It used to be the case that class components were necessary to gain some of the benefits of React (such as state management), but with the recent introduction of [React Hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) that is no longer the case -- function components can use hooks to gain all the benefits of class components, while remaining easier to create and test. For that reason, the `dgraph-twitter-clone/client` app solely uses function components and hooks.

The `MySection` component above could, therefore, be rewritten as a function component that looks like this.

```jsx
export const MySection = () => {
  const sectionId = 'special-section';

  return (
    <section id={sectionId}>
      <p>Hello World</p>
    </section>
  );
};
```

It doesn't look all that different for now, but things change rather dramatically when we start adding state and other hooks.

#### Props

A component can receive a `props` argument object that typically contains properties relevant to that component, _or_ to child components further down the tree. `Props` are passed to components elements within JSX further up the chain (i.e. in the "parent" component). For example, here's a `MyApp` component that uses the `MySection` component in its render call.

```jsx
import { MySection } from './MySection';

const MyApp = () => {
  const sectionText = 'Hi Universe';

  return <MySection text={sectionText} />;
};
```

We're also passing a `props.text` value equal to `sectionText` to the `MySection` component. If we update the `MySection` component to accept the `props` object we can make use of that passed value.

```jsx
export const MySection = props => {
  const sectionId = 'special-section';

  return (
    <section id={sectionId}>
      <p>{props.text}</p>
    </section>
  );
};
```

The rendered HTML output of `MySection` now looks like this.

```html
<section id="special-section">
  <p>Hi Universe</p>
</section>
```

#### State

The last major React concept to touch on is **state.** Generally, state refers to the current value of an object at a given point in time. In React, the state is typically thought of as _mutable_ data related to a component's lifecycle (i.e. from when it's initialized and rendered to de-rendered and destroyed). Component **props**, on the other hand, are generally _immutable_ from the component's perspective -- they're received and maybe even duplicated and used for internal logic, but the _original_ props are not changed within the component. **Component state,** on the other hand, can be changed and that change should be "remembered" by the component throughout its lifecycle.

For class components, state is usually accessed through the `this.state` object, but for function components, no such object exists (since it's just a function, after all). This is where the introduction of **hooks** comes in; specifically the [useState](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-state.html) hook. The `useState` function hook allows a function component to both retrieve the current state and update that state in the future.

For example, here we'll add a bit of state to handle the section `id` of our `MySection` function component.

```jsx
export const MySection = props => {
  const [sectionId, setSectionId] = useState('special-section');

  return (
    <section id={sectionId}>
      <p>{props.text}</p>
    </section>
  );
};
```

The call to `useState()` passes the _initial_ value, which is then assigned to the first returned value which we've named `sectionId`. Thus, the first time we render the `MySection` component we see the section and its `id` attribute as `<section id="special-section">`.

The second value returned by `setState()` is a function that can be called to, well, _set_ the current state of that object. Let's add a `<button>` with an `onClick` handler that calls `setSectionId()` and passes a value of `not-so-special-section` to it.

```jsx
export const MySection = props => {
  const [sectionId, setSectionId] = useState('special-section');

  return (
    <section id={sectionId}>
      <p>{props.text}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setSectionId('not-so-special-section')}>
        Change Id
      </button>
    </section>
  );
};
```

React is appropriately named because it is _reactive_. When it recognizes that some component state has changed it triggers a new render of that component. Therefore, clicking the button and triggering the new state for `sectionId` renders `MySection`, and since the state (i.e. value) of `sectionId` was changed the updated HTML output now looks like the following.

```html
<section id="not-so-special-section">
  <p>Hi Universe</p>
  <button>
    Change Id
  </button>
</section>
```

{{% notice "tip" %}} React is a powerful library and can create some extremely complex architectures, so feel free to check out the [official documentation](https://reactjs.org/) to learn more about the concepts we've been briefly discussing here. {{% /notice %}}

{{% notice "warning" %}} The `dgraph-twitter-clone/client` was created by a programmer who is a rather poor designer, so this project is definitely function over form. To that end, the basic React app was bootstrapped using [create-react-app](https://facebook.github.io/create-react-app/), which creates a skeleton React app with most of the build tools added and handled out of the box. The look and styling are largely based on [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/), which only seems appropriate given that this is a Twitter clone. Ultimately, as discussed in the introduction, the goal of the client app is to illustrate how easily a graph database like Dgraph can integrate into a modern Twitter-like application, and how much power its many features such as GraphQL+- queries bring to the table. {{% /notice %}}

### Instantiating the App

Let's start looking through the client code at the top where our app is initialized, and we'll work our way down from there. The `client/src/index.tsx` [file](https://github.com/GabeStah/dgraph-twitter-clone/blob/master/client/src/index.tsx) invokes the React app and renders the primary `App` component, which is [found](https://github.com/GabeStah/dgraph-twitter-clone/blob/master/client/src/App.tsx) in `client/src/App.tsx`.

```tsx
// File: client/src/index.tsx
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import './index.css';
import App from './App';

ReactDOM.render(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

```tsx
// File: client/src/App.tsx
// Components
import Main from './components/Main/Main';
// Hooks
// Layout
import './App.css';
// Libs
import { BrowserRouter } from 'react-router-dom';
import React from 'react';
// Local
import { Reducer } from './reducers';
import { InitialState, StateProvider } from './state';
// Fonts
import { library } from '@fortawesome/fontawesome-svg-core';
import { far } from '@fortawesome/free-regular-svg-icons';
import { fas } from '@fortawesome/free-solid-svg-icons';

library.add(far);
library.add(fas);

const App = () => {
  return (
    <BrowserRouter>
      <StateProvider initialState={InitialState} reducer={Reducer}>
        <Main />
      </StateProvider>
    </BrowserRouter>
  );
};

export default App;
```

The `App` component wraps our entire application in the `BrowserRouter` component middleware, which comes from the [react-router-dom](https://reacttraining.com/react-router/web/guides/quick-start) package and allows us to perform routing by rendering certain components based on requested URL paths. We'll get into that more in just a moment.

#### Handling App State

The `StateProvider` component is a custom component based on [this post](https://medium.com/simply/state-management-with-react-hooks-and-context-api-at-10-lines-of-code-baf6be8302c) and code by Luke Hall.

```tsx
// File: client/src/state/StateProvider.tsx
/**
 * Author: Luke Hall
 * Source: https://medium.com/simply/state-management-with-react-hooks-and-context-api-at-10-lines-of-code-baf6be8302c
 */
import React, { createContext, useContext, useReducer } from 'react';
import { InitialState } from './State';

export const StateContext = createContext(InitialState);
export const StateProvider = ({ reducer, initialState, children }) => (
  <StateContext.Provider value={useReducer(reducer, initialState)}>
    {children}
  </StateContext.Provider>
);
export const useStateContext = () => useContext(StateContext);
```

This component provides global state throughout the application by using the [useContext](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usecontext) React hook. [**Context**](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html) is how React handles "global" state. As the [React Context.Provider](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html#contextprovider) documentation shows, a context provider passes its value down to any child components that _consume_ it. This is often a sleeker pattern to passing down large chains of props through a big component tree.

In the `StateProvider` component above, we're passing the returned values from the [`useReducer`](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usereducer) React hook down to the child components to consume. `useReducer()` is similar to the `useState()` hook, except it works with the **reducer + action + dispatcher** pattern found in common React libraries like [Redux](https://redux.js.org). Why use **reducers** instead of directly modifying **state**? The primary advantage is a separation of concerns. Rather than allowing our state to be directly mutable, we can instead **dispatch** a series of **actions** that tell the **reducer** to change the state in some way.

#### Actions and Reducers

To understand how actions and reducers work in conjunction to change our application state let's first look at how we're storing our state throughout most of our app. This is accomplished in the `client/src/state/State.ts` file.

```ts
// File: client/src/state/State.ts
import { Tweet, User } from 'dgraph-query-manager';

export const InitialState: any = {
  authUser: undefined,
  searchResults: undefined,
  user: undefined,
  tweets: [],
};

export interface StateInterface {
  authUser: User | undefined;
  searchResults: any;
  user: User | undefined;
  tweets: Tweet[];
}

export class State implements StateInterface {
  authUser: User | undefined;
  searchResults: undefined;
  user: User | undefined;
  tweets: Tweet[];
}
```

As you can see, we've defined a `StateInterface` with a handful of properties and we implement that `StateInterface` in the `State` class. We're also importing the `User` and `Tweet` models from `dgraph-query-manager` since we want to use those model objects throughout the application. The properties of `State` don't mean a lot right now, but we'll mutate the values of this class in our reducer below based on changes within the app.

Next let's look at the potential actions our reducer can expect, which are found in the `client/src/reducers/base/Action.ts` [file](https://github.com/GabeStah/dgraph-twitter-clone/blob/master/client/src/reducers/base/Action.ts).

```ts
// File: client/src/reducers/base/Action.ts
export enum ActionType {
  SET_AUTHENTICATED_USER,
  SET_SEARCH_RESULTS,
  SET_USER,
  SET_TWEETS,
  UPDATE_TWEET,
  TOGGLE_TWEET_PROPERTY,
}

export interface ActionInterface {
  payload: any | undefined;
  type: ActionType;
}

export class Action implements ActionInterface {
  payload: any | undefined;
  type: ActionType;

  constructor(type: ActionType, payload?: any) {
    this.type = type;
    this.payload = payload;
  }
}
```

As mentioned above, the purpose of a reducer to change state is that it accepts an action and, based on what that action tells it, makes changes to the state. **Critically**, a reducer is meant to be [idempotent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence), meaning repeated calls to the same reducer with the same arguments should _always_ result in the same outcome. Another common term for this type of code is a **pure function**. Simply put, your reducer logic should have no side effects.

So, our simple `Action` class accepts an `ActionType`, which is an enum of explicit options. It also accepts an optional payload, which will be used for additional parameters when necessary.

Now let's see how the reducer uses our `Action` and `State` class to mutate application state by [checking out](https://github.com/GabeStah/dgraph-twitter-clone/blob/master/client/src/reducers/base/Reducer.ts) `client/src/reducers/base/Reducer.ts`.

```ts
// File: client/src/reducers/base/Reducer.ts
import { Action, ActionType } from './Action';
import { State } from '../../state/';
import { Uid } from 'dgraph-query-manager';
import * as _ from 'lodash';

export const Reducer = (state: State, action: Action): State => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case ActionType.SET_AUTHENTICATED_USER: {
      return {
        ...state,
        authUser: action.payload,
      };
    }

    case ActionType.SET_SEARCH_RESULTS: {
      return {
        ...state,
        searchResults: action.payload,
      };
    }

    case ActionType.SET_USER: {
      return {
        ...state,
        user: action.payload,
      };
    }

    case ActionType.UPDATE_TWEET: {
      if (!state.tweets) return state;
      const index = state.tweets.findIndex(
        tweet => tweet.uid === action.payload.uid
      );
      const tempTweets = state.tweets;
      // Update passed Tweet.
      tempTweets[index] = action.payload;
      return {
        ...state,
        tweets: tempTweets,
      };
    }

    case ActionType.SET_TWEETS: {
      return {
        ...state,
        // If array, sort in descending order.
        tweets: Array.isArray(action.payload)
          ? action.payload.sort(
              (a, b) =>
                +new Date(b['tweet.createdAt']) -
                +new Date(a['tweet.createdAt'])
            )
          : [action.payload],
      };
    }

    case ActionType.TOGGLE_TWEET_PROPERTY: {
      const isEnabled = action.payload.isEnabled;
      const property = action.payload.property;
      const tweet = action.payload.tweet;
      const user = action.payload.user;

      const clone = _.clone(tweet);

      if (!_.has(clone, property)) {
        clone[property] = [];
      } else if (!_.isArray(clone[property])) {
        clone[property] = [clone[property]];
      }
      if (isEnabled) {
        clone[property].push(user);
      } else {
        clone[property] = _.reject(
          clone[property],
          other =>
            new Uid(other.uid).toString() === new Uid(user.uid).toString()
        );
      }

      return {
        ...state,
        tweets: _.map(state.tweets, original => {
          return original.uid.toString() === tweet.uid.toString()
            ? clone
            : original;
        }),
      };
    }

    default: {
      return state;
    }
  }
};
```

The `Reducer` class accepts two arguments: the current `State` and an `Action` instance. Based on the `ActionType` of the passed `Action` it modifies the state in some way and returns the **new state** object. Nothing too crazy going on here.

Now, if we look back at the `StateProvider` component, and specifically how it passes the returned values from `useReducer()` as the `StateProvider.Provider` `value`, you can start to see what's going on.

```tsx
// File: client/src/state/StateProvider.tsx
export const StateContext = createContext(InitialState);
export const StateProvider = ({ reducer, initialState, children }) => (
  <StateContext.Provider value={useReducer(reducer, initialState)}>
    {children}
  </StateContext.Provider>
);
export const useStateContext = () => useContext(StateContext);
```

A call to the `useReducer()` hook returns two values: The current state and a `dispatch` function. The dispatch function is invoked whenever you need to call the reducer and pass it a new action to perform. We'll go over this component in more detail in the [TweetBox](#tweet-box) section, but here is a snippet from that component code that shows how we're retrieving `State` properties. After destructuring the `tweets` state value we later call the `dispatch` function and pass in a new `Action` instance to inform the reducer what it should do -- in this case, to `SET_TWEETS` to the array passed as the `payload` argument.

```ts
// File: client/src/components/Tweet/TweetBox.tsx
const [{ authUser, user, tweets }, dispatch] = useStateContext();
// ...
dispatch(
  new Action(ActionType.SET_TWEETS, [...tweets, serialization.response])
);
```
